Next day Frodo woke early, feeling refreshed and well. He walked
along the terraces above the loud-flowing Bruinen and watched the
pale, cool sun rise above the far mountains, and shine down, slanting
through the thin silver mist; the dew upon the yellow leaves was
glimmering, and the woven nets of gossamer twinkled on every bush.
Sam walked beside him, saying nothing, but sniffing the air, and
looking every now and again with wonder in his eyes at the great
heights in the East. The snow was white upon their peaks.
On a seat cut in the stone beside a turn in the path they came
upon Gandalf and Bilbo deep in talk. ‘Hullo! Good morning!’ said
Bilbo. ‘Feel ready for the great council?’

‘I feel ready for anything,’ answered Frodo. ‘But most of all I
should like to go walking today and explore the valley. I should like
to get into those pine-woods up there.’ He pointed away far up the
side of Rivendell to the north.

‘You may have a chance later,’ said Gandalf. ‘But we cannot make
any plans yet. There is much to hear and decide today.’
Suddenly as they were talking a single clear bell rang out. ‘That
is the warning bell for the Council of Elrond,’ cried Gandalf. ‘Come
along now! Both you and Bilbo are wanted.’
Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the winding
path back to the house; behind them, uninvited and for the moment
forgotten, trotted Sam.

Gandalf led them to the porch where Frodo had found his friends
the evening before. The light of the clear autumn morning was now
glowing in the valley. The noise of bubbling waters came up from
the foaming river-bed. Birds were singing, and a wholesome peace
lay on the land. To Frodo his dangerous flight, and the rumours of
the darkness growing in the world outside, already seemed only the
memories of a troubled dream; but the faces that were turned to
meet them as they entered were grave.

Elrond was there, and several others were seated in silence about
him. Frodo saw Glorfindel and Gloin; and in a corner alone Strider
was sitting, clad in his old travel-worn clothes again. Elrond drew
Frodo to a seat by his side, and presented him to the company,
saying:

‘Here, my friends, is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo. Few have
ever come hither through greater peril or on an errand more urgent.’
He then pointed out and named those whom Frodo had not met
before. There was a younger dwarf at Gloin’s side: his son Gimli.
Beside Glorfindel there were several other counsellors of Elrond’s
household, of whom Erestor was the chief; and with him was Galdor,
an Elf from the Grey Havens who had come on an errand from
Cı´rdan the Shipwright. There was also a strange Elf clad in green
and brown, Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil, the
King of the Elves of Northern Mirkwood. And seated a little apart
was a tall man with a fair and noble face, dark-haired and grey-eyed,
proud and stern of glance.

He was cloaked and booted as if for a journey on horseback; and
indeed though his garments were rich, and his cloak was lined with
fur, they were stained with long travel. He had a collar of silver in
which a single white stone was set; his locks were shorn about his
shoulders. On a baldric he wore a great horn tipped with silver that
now was laid upon his knees. He gazed at Frodo and Bilbo with
sudden wonder.

‘Here,’ said Elrond, turning to Gandalf, ‘is Boromir, a man from
the South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks for counsel. I
have bidden him to be present, for here his questions will be
answered.’

Not all that was spoken and debated in the Council need now be
told. Much was said of events in the world outside, especially in the
South, and in the wide lands east of the Mountains. Of these things
Frodo had already heard many rumours; but the tale of Gloin was
new to him, and when the dwarf spoke he listened attentively. It
appeared that amid the splendour of their works of hand the hearts
of the Dwarves of the Lonely Mountain were troubled.

‘It is now many years ago,’ said Gloin, ‘that a shadow of disquiet
fell upon our people. Whence it came we did not at first perceive.
Words began to be whispered in secret: it was said that we were
hemmed in a narrow place, and that greater wealth and splendour
would be found in a wider world. Some spoke of Moria: the mighty
works of our fathers that are called in our own tongue Khazad-duˆm;
and they declared that now at last we had the power and numbers
to return.’

Gloin sighed. ‘Moria! Moria! Wonder of the Northern world! Too
deep we delved there, and woke the nameless fear. Long have its vast
mansions lain empty since the children of Durin fled. But now we
spoke of it again with longing, and yet with dread; for no dwarf has
dared to pass the doors of Khazad-duˆm for many lives of kings, save
Thro´r only, and he perished. At last, however, Balin listened to the
whispers, and resolved to go; and though Da´in did not give leave
willingly, he ´ took with him Ori and Oin and many of our folk, and
they went away south.

‘That was nigh on thirty years ago. For a while we had news and
it seemed good: messages reported that Moria had been entered and
a great work begun there. Then there was silence, and no word has
ever come from Moria since.

‘Then about a year ago a messenger came to Da´in, but not from
Moria – from Mordor: a horseman in the night, who called Da´in to
his gate. The Lord Sauron the Great, so he said, wished for our
friendship. Rings he would give for it, such as he gave of old. And
he asked urgently concerning hobbits, of what kind they were, and
where they dwelt. ‘‘For Sauron knows,’’ said he, ‘‘that one of these
was known to you on a time.’’

‘At this we were greatly troubled, and we gave no answer. And
then his fell voice was lowered, and he would have sweetened it if
he could. ‘‘As a small token only of your friendship Sauron asks
this,’’ he said: ‘‘that you should find this thief,’’ such was his word,
‘‘and get from him, willing or no, a little ring, the least of rings, that
once he stole. It is but a trifle that Sauron fancies, and an earnest of
your good will. Find it, and three rings that the Dwarf-sires possessed
of old shall be returned to you, and the realm of Moria shall be yours
for ever. Find only news of the thief, whether he still lives and where,
and you shall have great reward and lasting friendship from the Lord.
Refuse, and things will not seem so well. Do you refuse?’’
‘At that his breath came like the hiss of snakes, and all who stood
by shuddered, but Da´in said: ‘‘I say neither yea nor nay. I must
consider this message and what it means under its fair cloak.’’
‘ ‘‘Consider well, but not too long,’’ said he.
‘ ‘‘The time of my thought is my own to spend,’’ answered Da´in.
‘ ‘‘For the present,’’ said he, and rode into the darkness.
‘Heavy have the hearts of our chieftains been since that night. We
needed not the fell voice of the messenger to warn us that his words
held both menace and deceit; for we knew already that the power
that has re-entered Mordor has not changed, and ever it betrayed us
of old. Twice the messenger has returned, and has gone unanswered.
The third and last time, so he says, is soon to come, before the ending
of the year.

‘And so I have been sent at last by Da´in to warn Bilbo that he is
sought by the Enemy, and to learn, if may be, why he desires this
ring, this least of rings. Also we crave the advice of Elrond. For the
Shadow grows and draws nearer. We discover that messengers have
come also to King Brand in Dale, and that he is afraid. We fear that
he may yield. Already war is gathering on his eastern borders. If we
make no answer, the Enemy may move Men of his rule to assail King
Brand, and Da´in also.’

‘You have done well to come,’ said Elrond. ‘You will hear today
all that you need in order to understand the purposes of the Enemy.
There is naught that you can do, other than to resist, with hope or
without it. But you do not stand alone. You will learn that your
trouble is but part of the trouble of all the western world. The Ring!
What shall we do with the Ring, the least of rings, the trifle that
Sauron fancies? That is the doom that we must deem.
‘That is the purpose for which you are called hither. Called, I say,
though I have not called you to me, strangers from distant lands.
You have come and are here met, in this very nick of time, by chance
as it may seem. Yet it is not so. Believe rather that it is so ordered
that we, who sit here, and none others, must now find counsel for
the peril of the world.

‘Now, therefore, things shall be openly spoken that have been
hidden from all but a few until this day. And first, so that all may
understand what is the peril, the Tale of the Ring shall be told from
the beginning even to this present. And I will begin that tale, though
others shall end it.’

Then all listened while Elrond in his clear voice spoke of Sauron
and the Rings of Power, and their forging in the Second Age of the
world long ago. A part of his tale was known to some there, but the
full tale to none, and many eyes were turned to Elrond in fear and
wonder as he told of the Elven-smiths of Eregion and their friendship
with Moria, and their eagerness for knowledge, by which Sauron
ensnared them. For in that time he was not yet evil to behold, and
they received his aid and grew mighty in craft, whereas he learned
all their secrets, and betrayed them, and forged secretly in the
Mountain of Fire the One Ring to be their master. But Celebrimbor was
aware of him, and hid the Three which he had made; and there was
war, and the land was laid waste, and the gate of Moria was shut.
Then through all the years that followed he traced the Ring; but
since that history is elsewhere recounted, even as Elrond himself set
it down in his books of lore, it is not here recalled. For it is a long
tale, full of deeds great and terrible, and briefly though Elrond spoke,
the sun rode up the sky, and the morning was passing ere he ceased.
Of Nu´menor he spoke, its glory and its fall, and the return of the
Kings of Men to Middle-earth out of the deeps of the Sea, borne
upon the wings of storm. Then Elendil the Tall and his mighty sons,
Isildur and Ana´rion, became great lords; and the North-realm they
made in Arnor, and the South-realm in Gondor above the mouths
of Anduin. But Sauron of Mordor assailed them, and they made the
Last Alliance of Elves and Men, and the hosts of Gil-galad and
Elendil were mustered in Arnor.

Thereupon Elrond paused a while and sighed. ‘I remember well
the splendour of their banners,’ he said. ‘It recalled to me the glory
of the Elder Days and the hosts of Beleriand, so many great princes
and captains were assembled. And yet not so many, nor so fair, as
when Thangorodrim was broken, and the Elves deemed that evil was
ended for ever, and it was not so.’

‘You remember?’ said Frodo, speaking his thought aloud in his
astonishment. ‘But I thought,’ he stammered as Elrond turned
towards him, ‘I thought that the fall of Gil-galad was a long age ago.’
‘So it was indeed,’ answered Elrond gravely. ‘But my memory
reaches back even to the Elder Days. Ea¨rendil was my sire, who was
born in Gondolin before its fall; and my mother was Elwing, daughter
of Dior, son of Lu´thien of Doriath. I have seen three ages in the
West of the world, and many defeats, and many fruitless victories.
‘I was the herald of Gil-galad and marched with his host. I was at
the Battle of Dagorlad before the Black Gate of Mordor, where we
had the mastery: for the Spear of Gil-galad and the Sword of Elendil,
Aeglos and Narsil, none could withstand. I beheld the last combat
on the slopes of Orodruin, where Gil-galad died, and Elendil fell,
and Narsil broke beneath him; but Sauron himself was overthrown,
and Isildur cut the Ring from his hand with the hilt-shard of his
father’s sword, and took it for his own.’

At this the stranger, Boromir, broke in. ‘So that is what became
of the Ring!’ he cried. ‘If ever such a tale was told in the South, it
has long been forgotten. I have heard of the Great Ring of him that
we do not name; but we believed that it perished from the world in
the ruin of his first realm. Isildur took it! That is tidings indeed.’
‘Alas! yes,’ said Elrond. ‘Isildur took it, as should not have been.
It should have been cast then into Orodruin’s fire nigh at hand where
it was made. But few marked what Isildur did. He alone stood by
his father in that last mortal contest; and by Gil-galad only Cı´rdan
stood, and I. But Isildur would not listen to our counsel.
‘ ‘‘This I will have as weregild for my father, and my brother,’’ he
said; and therefore whether we would or no, he took it to treasure
it. But soon he was betrayed by it to his death; and so it is named
in the North Isildur’s Bane. Yet death maybe was better than what
else might have befallen him.

‘Only to the North did these tidings come, and only to a few.
Small wonder is it that you have not heard them, Boromir. From the
ruin of the Gladden Fields, where Isildur perished, three men only
came ever back over the mountains after long wandering. One of
these was Ohtar, the esquire of Isildur, who bore the shards of the
sword of Elendil; and he brought them to Valandil, the heir of Isildur,
who being but a child had remained here in Rivendell. But Narsil
was broken and its light extinguished, and it has not yet been forged
again.

‘Fruitless did I call the victory of the Last Alliance? Not wholly
so, yet it did not achieve its end. Sauron was diminished, but not
destroyed. His Ring was lost but not unmade. The Dark Tower was
broken, but its foundations were not removed; for they were made
with the power of the Ring, and while it remains they will endure.
Many Elves and many mighty Men, and many of their friends, had
perished in the war. Ana´rion was slain, and Isildur was slain; and
Gil-galad and Elendil were no more. Never again shall there be any
such league of Elves and Men; for Men multiply and the Firstborn
decrease, and the two kindreds are estranged. And ever since that
day the race of Nu´menor has decayed, and the span of their years
has lessened.

‘In the North after the war and the slaughter of the Gladden
Fields the Men of Westernesse were diminished, and their city of
Annu´minas beside Lake Evendim fell into ruin; and the heirs of
Valandil removed and dwelt at Fornost on the high North Downs,
and that now too is desolate. Men call it Deadmen’s Dike, and they
fear to tread there. For the folk of Arnor dwindled, and their foes
devoured them, and their lordship passed, leaving only green mounds
in the grassy hills.

‘In the South the realm of Gondor long endured; and for a while
its splendour grew, recalling somewhat of the might of Nu´menor,
ere it fell. High towers that people built, and strong places, and
havens of many ships; and the winged crown of the Kings of Men
was held in awe by folk of many tongues. Their chief city was Osgiliath,
Citadel of the Stars, through the midst of which the River flowed.
And Minas Ithil they built, Tower of the Rising Moon, eastward
upon a shoulder of the Mountains of Shadow; and westward at the
feet of the White Mountains Minas Anor they made, Tower of the
Setting Sun. There in the courts of the King grew a white tree, from
the seed of that tree which Isildur brought over the deep waters, and
the seed of that tree before came from Eresse¨a, and before that out
of the Uttermost West in the Day before days when the world was
young.

‘But in the wearing of the swift years of Middle-earth the line of
Meneldil son of Ana´rion failed, and the Tree withered, and the blood
of the Nu´meno´reans became mingled with that of lesser men. Then
the watch upon the walls of Mordor slept, and dark things crept back
to Gorgoroth. And on a time evil things came forth, and they took
Minas Ithil and abode in it, and they made it into a place of dread;
and it is called Minas Morgul, the Tower of Sorcery. Then Minas
Anor was named anew Minas Tirith, the Tower of Guard; and these
two cities were ever at war, but Osgiliath which lay between was
deserted and in its ruins shadows walked.

‘So it has been for many lives of men. But the Lords of Minas
Tirith still fight on, defying our enemies, keeping the passage of the
River from Argonath to the Sea. And now that part of the tale that
I shall tell is drawn to its close. For in the days of Isildur the Ruling
Ring passed out of all knowledge, and the Three were released from
its dominion. But now in this latter day they are in peril once more,
for to our sorrow the One has been found. Others shall speak of its
finding, for in that I played small part.’

He ceased, but at once Boromir stood up, tall and proud, before
them. ‘Give me leave, Master Elrond,’ said he, ‘first to say more of
Gondor, for verily from the land of Gondor I am come. And it would
be well for all to know what passes there. For few, I deem, know of
our deeds, and therefore guess little at their peril, if we should fail
at last.

‘Believe not that in the land of Gondor the blood of Nu´menor is
spent, nor all its pride and dignity forgotten. By our valour the wild
folk of the East are still restrained, and the terror of Morgul kept at
bay; and thus alone are peace and freedom maintained in the lands
behind us, bulwark of the West. But if the passages of the River
should be won, what then?

‘Yet that hour, maybe, is not now far away. The Nameless Enemy
has arisen again. Smoke rises once more from Orodruin that we call
Mount Doom. The power of the Black Land grows and we are hard
beset. When the Enemy returned our folk were driven from Ithilien,
our fair domain east of the River, though we kept a foothold there
and strength of arms. But this very year, in the days of June, sudden
war came upon us out of Mordor, and we were swept away. We were
outnumbered, for Mordor has allied itself with the Easterlings and
the cruel Haradrim; but it was not by numbers that we were defeated.
A power was there that we have not felt before.

‘Some said that it could be seen, like a great black horseman, a
dark shadow under the moon. Wherever he came a madness filled
our foes, but fear fell on our boldest, so that horse and man gave
way and fled. Only a remnant of our eastern force came back,
destroying the last bridge that still stood amid the ruins of Osgiliath.
‘I was in the company that held the bridge, until it was cast down
behind us. Four only were saved by swimming: my brother and myself
and two others. But still we fight on, holding all the west shores of
Anduin; and those who shelter behind us give us praise, if ever they
hear our name: much praise but little help. Only from Rohan now
will any men ride to us when we call.

‘In this evil hour I have come on an errand over many dangerous
leagues to Elrond: a hundred and ten days I have journeyed all alone.
But I do not seek allies in war. The might of Elrond is in wisdom
not in weapons, it is said. I come to ask for counsel and the unravelling
of hard words. For on the eve of the sudden assault a dream came
to my brother in a troubled sleep; and afterwards a like dream came
oft to him again, and once to me.